move common hardware attributes and metrics to registry (#1030)
open-telemetry/semantic-conventions: docs/hardware/common.md

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:
linkTitle: Hardware Common Metrics
--->

# Semantic Conventions for Hardware Common Metrics

**Status**: [Experimental][DocumentStatus]

> All metrics in `hw.` instruments should be attached to a [Host Resource](/docs/resource/host.md)

Reviewer: Is is a responsibility of instrumentation author or the end user?

Author: This is refactoring (copy-paste) from original file.

Reviewer 2: Responsibility is on the instrumentation developer.

Reviewer 2: @lmolkova I'm sorry, but there must be a misunderstanding here. Let's say I'm HPE developing an OpenTelemetry instrumentation for my ProLiant servers, I will use an Otel SDK to push metrics that I captured through specific hardware busses, and while developing this software layer, I will need to create a Resource to attach my metrics to, so that both Resources and Metrics are sent over OTLP.

It's simply a matter of making sure all metrics have the proper attributes to attach them to a host.

Without these, it's practically impossible to use these metrics in real life.

Reviewer 2: @lmolkova I understand. 

For my own knowledge, could you please clarify what you call "instrumentation"?

Author: Should I rephrase this sentence then such as 
```suggestion
Application developers should attach all the metrics in the `hw` namespace to a `Host Resource](/docs/resource/host.md)."
```

<!-- semconv hardware.attributes.common -->
| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`hw.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/hw.md) | string | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/hw.md) | string | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component | `eth0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hw.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
<!-- endsemconv -->

## Common hardware metrics

The below metrics apply to any type of hardware component.

These common `hw.` metrics include the below attributes to describe the
monitored component:

> <!-- semconv metric.hardware.attributes(full) -->

Reviewer: we have another attribute table defined above, which of them should be applied to metrics?

Author: In original md file here was defined only `type` 
common attributes extend the table above therefore when you render it it has both previous attributes and `type`. Do you know how to skip it or should we skip it?

Reviewer: Since each metric in this file defines extra attributes in addition to common ones, I suggest removing common attributes and just generating full attribute tables for each metric.

Otherwise it becomes hard to understand from the reader perspective which attribute apply to a specific metric without scrolling back and forth

Reviewer 2: I agree with @lmolkova's suggestion here.

<!--- Hugo front matter used to generate the website version of this page:

> linkTitle: Hardware Common Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
linkTitle: Common Hardware Metrics
```

--->

> # Semantic Conventions for Hardware Common Metrics

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Semantic Conventions for Common Hardware Metrics
```

| `tape_drive` | Tape drive | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `temperature` | Temperature | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| `voltage` | Voltage | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

### Metric: `hw.energy`

This metric is [recommended][MetricRecommended].

<!-- semconv metric.hardware.energy(metric_table) -->
<!-- NOTE: THIS TEXT IS AUTOGENERATED. DO NOT EDIT BY HAND. -->
<!-- see templates/registry/markdown/snippet.md.j2 -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-start -->
<!-- markdownlint-capture -->
<!-- markdownlint-disable -->

| Name     | Instrument Type | Unit (UCUM) | Description    | Stability |
| -------- | --------------- | ----------- | -------------- | --------- |
| `hw.energy` | Counter | `J` | Energy consumed by the component | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

<!-- markdownlint-restore -->
<!-- prettier-ignore-end -->
<!-- END AUTOGENERATED TEXT -->
<!-- endsemconv -->

> <!-- semconv metric.hardware.energy(full) -->

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- semconv metric.hardware.energy -->
```

(and in other places)

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`hw.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.type`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Type of the component [1] | `battery`; `cpu`; `disk_controller` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component | `eth0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `hw.id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`hw.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.type`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Type of the component [1] | `battery`; `cpu`; `disk_controller` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`error.type`](/docs/attributes-registry/error.md) | string | Describes a class of error the operation ended with. [2] | `timeout`; `java.net.UnknownHostException`; `server_certificate_invalid`; `500` | `Recommended` | ![Stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/-stable-lightgreen) |

Reviewer 2: The description is confusing in the context of hardware metrics.

Author: I can overwrite it here - what do you propose?

| [`hw.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component | `eth0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `hw.id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```

**[1]:** Describes the category of the hardware component for which `hw.state` is being reported. For example, `hw.type=temperature` along with `hw.state=degraded` would indicate that the temperature of the hardware component has been reported as `degraded`.

**[2]:** The `error.type` SHOULD be predictable, and SHOULD have low cardinality.

When `error.type` is set to a type (e.g., an exception type), its
canonical class name identifying the type within the artifact SHOULD be used.

Instrumentations SHOULD document the list of errors they report.

The cardinality of `error.type` within one instrumentation library SHOULD be low.
Telemetry consumers that aggregate data from multiple instrumentation libraries and applications
should be prepared for `error.type` to have high cardinality at query time when no
additional filters are applied.

If the operation has completed successfully, instrumentations SHOULD NOT set `error.type`.

If a specific domain defines its own set of error identifiers (such as HTTP or gRPC status codes),
it's RECOMMENDED to:

> * Use a domain-specific attribute

Reviewer 2: Given the description of the `error.type` attribute, I suggest that we enforce `error.type="hardware"` (or `error.type="hw"`?) and let the instrumentation use `hw.error.type` to specify the type of hardware error.

In issue #940, @eero-t suggested to add another attribute `hw.error.category`, to define even more precisely the type of error.

Author: later error.type would have precise specific values i.e. https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/system/hardware-metrics/#hwcpu---physical-processor-metrics or https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/system/hardware-metrics/#hwgpu---gpu-metrics so `error.type` will be defined for specific hardware component

Reviewer 3: > In issue #940, @eero-t suggested to add another attribute `hw.error.category`, to define even more precisely the type of error.

I changed my suggestion later to: https://github.com/open-telemetry/semantic-conventions/issues/940#issuecomment-2085109515
* `.severity`: correctable, uncorrectable (data loss), fatal (functionality loss)
* `.type`: type / category of the error; timeout, memory-parity-error, hw-programming-error etc
* `.location` / `.origin` / `.cause` / `.whatever`: e.g. http-endpoint, display (part of GPU with some memory), compute (GPU pipeline setting)

Author: This type of changes should be an additional PR after this one gets merged. So we don't mix refactoring (with minor changes) and major changes/new functionality

| Attribute  | Type | Description  | Examples  | [Requirement Level](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/semconv/general/attribute-requirement-level/) | Stability |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`hw.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.type`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Type of the component [1] | `battery`; `cpu`; `disk_controller` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component | `eth0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `hw.id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```

|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| [`hw.id`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An identifier for the hardware component, unique within the monitored host | `win32battery_battery_testsysa33_1` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.state`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | The current state of the component | `ok`; `degraded`; `failed` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.type`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Type of the component [1] | `battery`; `cpu`; `disk_controller` | `Required` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
| [`hw.name`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | An easily-recognizable name for the hardware component | `eth0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

> | [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| [`hw.parent`](/docs/attributes-registry/hardware.md) | string | Unique identifier of the parent component (typically the `hw.id` attribute of the enclosure, or disk controller) | `dellStorage_perc_0` | `Recommended` | ![Experimental](https://img.shields.io/badge/-experimental-blue) |
```
